Bats are wonderful creatures. Blind from the eyes but the vision is sharper than humans,
Ultrasonic ranging is the technique used by bats. Ultrasonic sensors provide an easy way in
distance measurement. The sensor is perfect for distance measurements between moving or
stationary objects. Ultrasonic Sensors measure the distance of the objects in air through
non-contact technique. They measure distance without damage and are easy to use and reliable.
These distance measurement sensors connect with all common types of automation and telemetry
equipment. Distance measurement sensors are used to control or indicate the position of objects
and materials. Distance measurement sensors can determine the dimensions of objects such as
height, width and diameter, using one or more sensors. The echo time response of an ultrasonic
sensor detector is based on time of travel after the trigger pulse to the surrounding objects is
non-linear and depends on the reflectance characteristics of the object surface. They offer low
cost and a precision of less than 1 cm in distance measurements of up to 6m.


This application is based upon the reflection of sound waves. Sound waves are defined as
longitudinal pressure waves in the medium in which they are travelling. Subjects whose
dimensions are larger than the wavelength of the impinging sound waves reflect them, the
reflected waves are called the echo. If the speed of sound in the medium is known and the time
taken for the sound waves to travel the distance from the source to the subject and back to the
source is measured, the distance from the source to the subject can be computed accurately. This
is the measurement principle of this application.


In this work, distance of the object is measured through ultrasonic distance sensor and the sensor
output is connected to signal conditioning unit and after that it is processed through Arduino
microcontroller, the measured results are displayed in liquid crystal display. The results are
transferred to the system where the predefined distance range is specified and if satisfied, further
commands are passed to the buzzer and it then beeps. This application is also used to find the
obstacles detection and the exact distance can also be obtained. The measured distance is
displayed on the LCD display.
